XS✔ ◾ Update rule common design patterns (#8371)
SSWConsulting/SSW.Rules.Content: rules/do-you-know-the-common-design-patterns-part-1/rule.md

  url: https://ssw.com.au/people/adam-stephensen
- title: Damian Brady
  url: https://ssw.com.au/people/damian-brady
- title: Dhruv Mathur
  url: https://ssw.com.au/people/dhruv-mathur
related: []
redirects:
- do-you-know-the-common-design-patterns-(part-1)

---

Design patterns are useful for ensuring [common design principles](/do-you-know-the-common-design-principles-part-1) are being followed.  They help make your code consistent, predictable, and easy to maintain.

<!--endintro-->

There are a very large number of Design Patterns, but here are a few important ones.

* **IOC** | [Inversion of Control](http&#58;//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inversion_of_control)  
In this pattern, control over the instantiation and management of objects is inverted, meaning that these responsibilities are handed over to an external framework like a DI container instead of being managed by the classes themselves. This separation enhances flexibility and decouples all the classes in the system.

* **DI** | [Dependency Injection](http&#58;//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_injection)  

> DI is a form of IoC where dependencies are provided to objects rather than created by them, one instance of the dependency can be used by many. This pattern also reduces dependency coupling between components since the instantiation is handled enternally, making the system easier to manage and test.

Reviewer: Do you mean externally or internally?

```suggestion
DI is a form of IoC where dependencies are provided to objects rather than created by them, one instance of the dependency can be used by many. This pattern also reduces dependency coupling between components since the instantiation is handled externally, making the system easier to manage and test.
```

* **Factory** | [Factory Pattern](http&#58;//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factory_pattern)  

> Its a creational pattern that deals with the problem of creating objects without specifying the exact class of object that will be created. This is done by defining an interface or abstract class for creating an object, which subclasses decide how to implement. This pattern helps in managing and maintaining code by encapsulating how any object is created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is a creational pattern that deals with the problem of creating objects without specifying the exact class of object that will be created. This is done by defining an interface or abstract class for creating an object, which subclasses decide how to implement. This pattern helps in managing and maintaining code by encapsulating how any object is created.
```

* **Singleton** | [Singleton Pattern](http&#58;//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern)  

> This ensures that a class has only one instance and provides a global point of access to it. This pattern is used to control access to resources that are shared throughout an application, like a configuration file or connection to a database. This ensures that multiple components can reuse a single instance without unecessarily creating multiple instances.

Reviewer: I think the last part is not needed.

```suggestion
This ensures that a class has only one instance and provides a global point of access to it. This pattern is used to control access to resources that are shared throughout an application, like a configuration file or connection to a database. This ensures that only a single shared instance of a class is consumed by the application.
```

* **Repository** | [Repository Pattern](http&#58;//msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ff649690.aspx)  
A repository abstracts the data layer, providing a collection-like interface for accessing domain objects. It centralizes common data access functionalities and promotes a more organized data access architecture. By isolating the data layer, this pattern ensures that changes to the database access code are minimized when changes to the business logic or database specifics occur.

* **Unit of Work** | [Unit of Work Pattern](http&#58;//msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/magazine/dd882510.aspx)  

> Its a way to keep track of everything you do during a transaction that can affect the database. When it's time to commit the transaction, it figures out everything that needs to be done to alter the database as a result of your work. This pattern is crucial for maintaining the consistency of data within the boundaries of a transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is a way to keep track of everything you do during a transaction that can affect the database. When it's time to commit the transaction, it figures out everything that needs to be done to alter the database as a result of your work. This pattern is crucial for maintaining the consistency of data within the boundaries of a transaction.
```

* **MVC** | [Model View Controller](http&#58;//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%e2%80%93view%e2%80%93controller)  

> It is an architectural pattern that separates an application into three main logical components: the model, the view, and the controller. Each of these components handles different aspects of the application's data, user interface, and control logic, respectively. This separation helps manage complexity in large applications and have efficient code reuse.

Reviewer: I'd leave the last part out 😄 

```suggestion
It is an architectural pattern that separates an application into three main logical components: the model, the view, and the controller. Each of these components handles different aspects of the application's data, user interface, and control logic, respectively. This separation helps manage complexity in large applications.
```
